Version 1.3 of package released, 12/05.  (Library version is now 1.3.)

Fixed a minor bug in miFillRectangles that rendered it ineffective (thanks
to several people for pointing this out).

The package may now be compiled with a C++ compiler; if desired, request
this by doing e.g. `CC=g++ ./configure'.

Support for pre-ANSI C compilers has been largely dropped.  Non-working
`const' is still checked for, but support for prototypes and void is now
assumed.  Removal of the preprocessor macros that supported pre-ANSI C,
from many source files, has considerably improved maintainability.

Updated GNU autotools have been used to prepare this release
(autoconf-2.59, libtool-1.5.6; and automake-1.4-p6 for safety's sake).

Copyright and license notices have been added to all source files.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Version 1.2 of package released, 6/00.  (Library version is now 1.2.)

Fixed bugs in mi_spans.c (in miUniquifySpanGroup, especially) dealing with
empty SpanGroups.  They were causing memory allocation problems, and even
segfaulting, whenever a region in one pixel color was completely covered by
a region in another pixel color.

libxmi now contains a version string, `mi_libxmi_ver'.  The xmi.h header
file now contains both the version string and a numeric variant of it, as
macros.  Cf. libpng.

Fixed a bug in miDrawArcs[_r] that was affecting the drawing of solid arcs.
(Sometimes they were incorrectly drawn in the background color, i.e., in
pixel color #0 rather than pixel color #1.)

The internal function `miAddSpansToPaintedSet' now has an underscore
prepended to its name, so that it won't pollute the user-level namespace.
Our policy: only the API functions should have external names that begin
with a letter.  This is arranged via #defines in extern.h.

At installation time, if CFLAGS is set, it will not be ignored.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Version 1.1.1 of package released, 9/99.  (First official GNU release
of package; library version is now 1.1.)

No changes to source code; minor changes to packaging.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Version 1.1 of package released, 7/99.  (Library version is now 1.1.)

Changed first argument of miCopyPaintedSetToCanvas from (miPaintedSet *)
to (const miPaintedSet *).

Fixed a bug that caused miDrawPoints() to segfault from when called on a
set consisting of only one point.

Fixed a bug in miCopyPaintedSetToCanvas() that was leading to intermittent
null pointer dereferencing.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Version 1.0 released, 6/99.  (Library version is now 1.0.)

Wrote a texinfo manual.

Added support for triangular joins, of both polylines and polyarcs.
Triangular caps are now supported too, but only for polyarcs.  Triangular
joins and caps are defined as in HP-GL/2.

Added miGCSetAttribs() function, to set multiple GC attributes with a
single function call.

Changed names of values of enumerated variables defined in xmi.h to modern
style (e.g. changed miJoinMiter to MI_JOIN_MITER).

In declarations of miSetPixelMerge{2|3}, changed typedef'd datatype of
second argument (miPixelMerge{2|3}) from a function to a pointer to a
function, for compatibility with very old C compilers.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Version 0.0 released, 6/99.
