The 22 Hershey fonts supported by GNU libplot and executables based on it
utilities are enhanced versions of the Hershey fonts that have been
incorporated in many software packages over the years.  They have been
extended, by the addition of accented and other special characters, to
provide virtually full support for the ISO-Latin-1 character set.  They
have been given new, modern-style names.

The following table lists the modern names and the traditional names.

	Modern Name			Traditional Name
	-----------			----------------
	HersheySerif			Complex Roman
	HersheySerif-Italic		Complex Italic
	HersheySerif-Bold		Triplex Roman
	HersheySerif-BoldItalic		Triplex Italic
	HersheySans			Simplex Roman
	HersheySans-Oblique		Simplex Roman [obliqued]
	HersheySans-Bold		Duplex Roman
	HersheySans-BoldOblique		Duplex Roman [obliqued]
	HersheyScript			Simplex Script
	HersheyScript-Bold		Complex Script
	HersheyGothicEnglish		Gothic English
	HersheyGothicGerman		Gothic German
	HersheyGothicItalian		Gothic Italian
	HersheySerifSymbol		Complex Greek
	HersheySerifSymbol-Oblique	Complex Greek [obliqued]
	HersheySerifSymbol-Bold		Triplex Greek
	HersheySerifSymbol-BoldOblique	Triplex Greek [obliqued]
	HersheySansSymbol		Simplex Greek
	HersheySansSymbol		Simplex Greek [obliqued]
	HersheyCyrillic			Complex Cyrillic, Roman
	HersheyCyrillic-Oblique		Complex Cyrillic, Roman [obliqued]
	HersheyEUC			[based on Japanese repertory]

The `obliqued' versions have been obtained by performing an anamorphic
transformation on the underlying font, to slant each character.

The following are excerpts from Allen Hershey's 1967 technical report,
`Calligraphy for Computers'.  They explain the origin of many of the fonts.
The names of the fonts have been modernized.

"[The HersheySans fonts] are adaptations of the alphabets on Le Roy
lettering sets.  [The HersheySerif fonts, the Greek characters in the
Hershey symbol fonts, and the Cyrillic characters in HersheyCyrillic] are
adaptations of the alphabets to be observed in newspapers, text books, and
dictionaries. (1,2)"

"[The HersheyScript fonts] been adapted from a Headliner Typemaster of the
Varityper Corporation.  [HersheyGothicEnglish] has been adapted from a 
Le Roy lettering set for Old English...  [HersheyGothicItalian] represents
a large family of alphabets for which there does not seem to be a
consistent nomenclature.  Some writers refer to it as Gothic uncial while
others call it Lombardic Gothic.  It seems to have been developed in
Lombardy while the best examples (3,4) come from Spain.  The present
version is an adaptation of a font [the `Missal Initials' font] of the
American Type Founders Company (5)...  [HersheyGothicGerman] is an
adaptation of Fraktur (6)."

Notes:

(1) Webster's [New] International Dictionary [of the English Language].  
    Second Edition.  (G. and C. Merriam Company, Springfield, Mass., 1959)  
    p. 75, p. 2750, p. 3001.

(2) Specimens of Type Faces.  (U. S. Government Printing Office,
    Washington, D. C.)

(3) Alphabets, Ancient and Modern.  J. B. Russell (Padell Book Co.,
    New York, 1945)

(4) Lettering from A to Z.  C. P. Hornung (Wm. Penn Publishing Corporation,
    New York, 1954)

(5) Specimen Book and Catalog.  (American Type Founders Company,
    Jersey City, N. J. 1923) p. 785

(6) Treasury of Alphabets and Lettering.  J. Tschichold (Reinhold 
    Publishing Corporation, New York, 1966)
