The table below displays the encodings for the Japanese Kana (syllabic
characters) that are built into the GNU libplot library and the GNU
plotting utilities based on it, such as `graph'.  They were digitized by
Dr. Allen V. Hershey of the U.S. Naval Surface Weapons Center (Dahlgren,
VA) in the mid-1960s.  For details, see his technical report "Calligraphy
for Computers".  (Available from the U.S. National Technical Information
Service at +1 703 487 4650; ask for item number AD662398.)

These Kana are part of the HersheyEUC font, which is employed for drawing
multibyte Japanese text strings.  But you may also use these Kana while
drawing text strings in any other Hershey font, by inserting the
appropriate escape sequences.  For example, you may label in Kana the axes
of a graph prepared with `graph'.

There are 83 Hiragana (cursive characters) and 86 Katakana (block
characters).  The indexing of the Kana is specified in the JIS X0208
standard.  In that standard the Hiragana appear as 0x2421..0x2473 and the
Katakana as 0x2521..0x2576.  Here `0x' means that the number that follows
is in base 16, or hexadecimal.  For full information on the JIS standard,
see "Understanding Japanese Information Processing", by Ken Lunde
(O'Reilly, 1993).

The Hiragana and Katakana are indexed in the table below as 0x21..0x73 and
0x21..0x76, respectively.  A transliteration of each Kana is included,
according to the Hepburn system.  For example, the Kana `ka' is listed as
0x2b.  The corresponding Hiragana would be 0x242b, and the corresponding
Katakana would be 0x252b.

To draw Hiragana `ka', you would use the escape sequence "\#J242b".  To
draw Katakana `ka', you would use the escape sequence "\#J252b".  These
escape sequences would be valid whenever the current font is a Hershey font
other than HersheyEUC.  By using the table below, you should find it easy
to draw a phonetic representation of most Japanese words, syllable by
syllable.

You should be aware that in Japanese, many words are normally written with
ideographic characters (Kanji) rather than Kana.  However, any Japanese
word may be rendered (possibly inelegantly) in terms of Kana.  For example,
"Mitsubishi" would be mi-tsu-bi-shi, i.e., "\#J245f\#J2444\#J2453\#J2437"
in terms of Hiragana.

You are cautioned that there are some special rules for combinations of
sounds, e.g. consonant + diphthong.  The `small' Kana are used for such
combinations.  Also, the `small tsu' Kana before a Kana beginning with the
consonant k, s, t, or p is interpreted not as a syllable, but as a sign
that that consonant should be doubled.


Code 	Kana transliteration
---- 	--------------------
     
0x21 	a [small]
0x22 	a
0x23 	i [small]
0x24 	i
0x25 	u [small]
0x26 	u
0x27 	e [small]
0x28 	e
0x29 	o [small]
0x2a 	o
0x2b 	ka
0x2c 	ga
0x2d 	ki
0x2e 	gi
0x2f 	ku
0x30 	gu
0x31 	ke
0x32 	ge
0x33 	ko
0x34 	go
0x35 	sa
0x36 	za
0x37 	shi
0x38 	ji
0x39 	su
0x3a 	zu
0x3b 	se
0x3c 	ze
0x3d 	so
0x3e 	zo
0x3f 	ta
0x40 	da
0x41 	chi
0x42 	dji
0x43 	tsu [small]
0x44 	tsu
0x45 	dzu
0x46 	te
0x47 	de
0x48 	to
0x49 	do
0x4a 	na
0x4b 	ni
0x4c 	nu
0x4d 	ne
0x4e 	no
0x4f 	ha
0x50 	ba
0x51 	pa
0x52 	hi
0x53 	bi
0x54 	pi
0x55 	fu
0x56 	bu
0x57 	pu
0x58 	he
0x59 	be
0x5a 	pe
0x5b 	ho
0x5c 	bo
0x5d 	po
0x5e 	ma
0x5f 	mi
0x60 	mu
0x61 	me
0x62 	mo
0x63 	ya [small]
0x64 	ya
0x65 	yu [small]
0x66 	yu
0x67 	yo [small]
0x68 	yo
0x69 	ra
0x6a 	ri
0x6b 	ru
0x6c 	re
0x6d 	ro
0x6e 	wa [small]
0x6f 	wa
0x70 	wi
0x71 	we
0x72 	wo
0x73 	n

KATAKANA only:

0x74	vu
0x75	ka [small]
0x76	ke [small]
